Genome Informatics Workshop MOLB 7620, Spring 2014

Instructor Information

Jay Hesselberth

Assistant Professor           

Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics

Email: jay.hesselberth@gmail.com

Phone: 303.724.5384

Office: RC1 South 10104

Brent Pedersen

Senior Research Associate

Department of Medicine

Email: bpederse@gmail.com

 

 

Teaching Assistants

Eric Nguyen

eric.2.nguyen@ucdenver.edu

Sally Peach

sallypeach@gmail.com

 

Schedule: Mon, Wed, Fri 2:30 – 4:00 PM.          

Classes are held in the Health Sciences Library Computer Teaching Lab 2

 

Course Description

The Genome Informatics Workshop is a hands-on tutorial of skills needed to process large genomics data sets and visualize their results. In the first session (6 weeks), we focus on working in the Linux environment, with considerable emphasis on Linux command-line tools, Python programming and the R statistical computing environment. We use publicly available next-generation DNA sequencing data from the ENCODE project to illustrate standard approaches for manipulating sequencing data, aligning sequences to a reference genome, generating coverage plots and displaying them in the UCSC Genome Browser. In the second session (6 weeks), we focus on specific analyses used in ENCODE project, including ChIP-seq, DNase I footprinting, mRNA-seq and genome sequencing to identify single nucleotide and structural variants. This class is taught from the standpoint of an experimentalist with practical goals (e.g. to interpret the results of a sequencing-based experiment and gain biologically meaningful insight).

 

Texts and Reading Materials

Required: Learn Python the Hard Way, (Link)

Required: Learn Bash (Shell) the Hard Way, (http://cli.learncodethehardway.org/book/)

Required: ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis (http://ggplot2.org/book/; also available in hard copy)

 

Course Objectives

First session (6 weeks, 27 Jan – 28 Feb)

Learn to manipulate large sequencing data sets with Linux tools and Python programming.

Learn to manipulate and visualize data in useful ways with the R statistical computing environment.

Second session (6 weeks, 3 Mar – 14 Apr)

    Learn workflows for experiments in ENCODE: ChIP-seq DNase I footprinting, mRNA-seq, variant detection.

    Learn to visualize data from the ENCODE project in the UCSC Genome Browser

 

Assessment

Progress of individual students will be assessed during the daily exercise session, problem sets assigned after specific classes as well as a final project.

 

Grading Criteria

50% participation

35% problem sets (7)

15% final project


Specific Dates / Material to be Covered

Block 1 (6 weeks starting 27 Jan and ending 5 Mar; MWF at 2:30 – 4 in HSL Lab 2)

Class 1 (M Jan 27) – Introduction to VM, Linux and the shell

Class 2 (W Jan 29) – Linux / Utilities (ls, cd)

Class 3 (F Jan 31) – Linux / Utilities (head, tail, cut, sort, grep, less)

Class 4 (M Feb 3) – Linux / Utilities (sed, awk)

Class 5 (W Feb 5) – Python / Modules / File I/O

Class 6 (F Feb 7) – Python / Logic control

Class 7 (M Feb 10) – Python / Advanced

Class 8 (W Feb 12) – Python / Reading, Formatting and Writing Data

Class 9 (F Feb 14) – Python / File Formats (includes bash, awk etc)

No Class Feb 17 (President’s Day)

Class 10 (W Feb 19) – Python / Useful modules

Class 11 (F Feb 21) – R / Data Types: vectors, lists, data.frame

Class 12 (M Feb 24) – R / Reshaping, aggregating and summarizing

Class 13 (W Feb 26) – R / Reshaping, aggregating and summarizing

Class 14 (F Feb 28) – R / Plotting with ggplot2

Class 15 (M Mar 3) – R / Plotting with ggplot2

Class 16 (W Mar 5) – R / Plotting with ggplot2

Block 2 (6 weeks starting 7 Mar and ending 14 Apr; MWF at 2:30 – 4 in HSL Lab 2)

Class 1 (F Mar 7) – ENCODE (Overview)

No Class Mar 10-14 (Spring Break)

Class 2 (M Mar 17) – ENCODE (Types of experiments)

Class 3 (W Mar 19) – MAY HAVE TO CANCEL, ROOM NOT AVAILABLE, TBA (original topic: ChIP-seq / DNaseI-seq (Read densities))

Class 4 (F Mar 21) – ChIP-seq / DNaseI-seq (Peak calling)

Class 5 (M Mar 24) – ChIP-seq / DNaseI-seq (Motif finding with MEME)

Class 6 (W Mar 26) – BEDtools (Quinlan)

Class 7 (F Mar 28) – mRNA-seq (RPKM values and ranking)

Class 8 (M Mar 31) – mRNA-seq (Differential expression)

Class 9 (W Apr 2) – mRNA-seq (Transcript isoforms)

Class 10 (F Apr 4) – Variant detection (Alignment and reprocessing)

Class 11 (M Apr 7) – Variant detection (SNP calling; heterozygotes)

Class 12 (W Apr 9) – Variant detection (CNV detection)

Class 13 (F Apr 11) – Variant detection (VCF files and manipulation)

Class 14 (M Apr 14) – Integration / Segway (Hoffman)

 

Specifics

Office Hours

Office hours of course instructors are by appointment. Instructor contacts and affiliations are listed at the top of the Syllabus.

 

Course Prerequisites

It is expected that prior to the class students read the material assigned for each

class.

 

Course Credits

This is a 2 credit course.

 

Required Texts and Materials

See top of syllabus

 

Supplementary Texts and Materials

Additional course readings will be announced in class

 

Grading Scale

Letter grades in assessments will be based upon the mean and standard deviation of the class scores. Students scoring less than 1.5 standard deviations below the mean may receive a failing grade of B- or lower. Conversely students scoring more than 1 SD above the mean will typically be in the A category.

 

Grade Dissemination

Graded tests and assignments in this course will be returned XXX

 

Attendance Policy

Attendance in all classes is mandatory. An unavoidable absence must be reported

to the course director and instructor of the specific class.

 

 Late Work Policy

There are no make-ups for in-class exams or quizzes. Assignment turned in late

will be assessed a penalty.

 

Extra Credit Policy

There will be no opportunity to earn extra credit.

 

Grades of Incomplete

The current university policy concerning incomplete grades will be followed in this course. Incomplete grades are given only in situations where unexpected emergencies prevent a student from completing the course and the remaining work can be completed the next semester. Your instructor is the final authority on whether a student 's work qualifies for an incomplete. Incomplete work must be finished by the end of the subsequent semester or the “I” will automatically be recorded as an “F” on your transcript.

 

Rewrite/Resubmit Policy

No rewrite opportunities

 

Technology and Media

Email: The course director and instructors communicate only via a student’s university email address.

 

Laptop and Mobile Device Usage

Laptop and mobile devices are permitted in class for course related functions only.

 

Student Expectations

Civility: It is our commitment is to create a climate for learning characterized by respect for each other and the contributions each person makes to class. We ask that you make a similar commitment.

 

Professionalism

Mobile devices must be silenced during all classroom sessions. Those not heeding this rule will be asked to leave the classroom immediately so as to not disrupt the learning environment.

 

Late Arrivals

Repeated late Arrivals will not be tolerated.

 

Religious Observances

If a religious observance is in conflict with a student's class attendance, the student is expected to alert the class instructor in advance.

 

Disability Access

The University of Colorado Denver|Anschutz Medical Campus is committed to providing reasonable accommodation and access to programs and services to persons with disabilities. Students with disabilities who want academic accommodations must register with Disability Resources and Services (DRS) at (303) 724-5640. We will be happy to provide approved accommodations, once you provide a copy of DRS’s letter. Please contact Pat Goggans (patricia.goggans@ucdenver.edu) for more information. DRS requires students to provide current and adequate documentation of their disabilities. Once a student has registered with DRS, DRS will review the documentation and assess the student’s request for academic accommodations in light of the documentation. DRS will then provide the student with a letter indicating which academic accommodations have been approved.]

 

Academic Dishonesty Student Code of Conduct: Students are expected to know, understand, and comply with the ethical standards of the university, including rules against plagiarism, cheating, fabrication and falsification, multiple submissions, misuse of academic materials, and complicity in academic dishonesty. For suggestions on ways to avoid academic dishonesty, please see the Academic Honesty Handbook at http://www.ucdenver.edu/faculty_staff/faculty/center-for-faculty- development/Documents/academic_honesty.pdf

 

Plagiarism is the use of another person’s ideas or words without acknowledgement. The incorporation of another person’s work into yours requires appropriate identification and acknowledgement. Examples of plagiarism when the source is not noted include: word-for-word copying of another person’s ideas or words; the “mosaic” (interspersing your own words here and there while, inessence, copying another’s work); the paraphrase (the rewriting of another’s work, while still using their basic ideas or theories); fabrication (inventing or counterfeiting sources); submission of another’s work as your own; and neglecting quotation marks when including direct quotes, even on material that is otherwise acknowledge.

 

Cheating involves the possession, communication, or use of information, materials, notes, study aids, or other devices and rubrics not specifically authorized by the course instructor in any academic exercise, or unauthorized communication with any other person during an academic exercise. Examples of cheating include: copying from another’s work or receiving unauthorized assistance from another; using a calculator, computer, or the internet when its use has been precluded; collaborating with another or others without the consent of the instructor; submitting another’s work as one’s own.

 

Fabrication involves inventing or counterfeiting information—creating results not properly obtained through study or laboratory experiment. Falsification involves deliberate alteration or changing of results to suit one’s needs in an experiment or academic exercise.

 

Multiple submissions involves submitting academic work in a current course when academic credit for the work was previously earned in another course, when such submission is made without the current course instructor’s authorization.

 

Misuse of academic materials includes: theft/destruction of library or reference materials or computer programs; theft/destruction of another student’s notes or materials; unauthorized possession of another student’s notes or materials; theft/destruction of examinations, papers, or assignments; unauthorized assistance in locating/using sources of information when forbidden or not authorized by the instructor; unauthorized possession, disposition, or use of examinations or answer keys; unauthorized alteration, forgery, fabrication, or falsification of academic records; unauthorized sale or purchase of examinations, papers, or assignments.

 

Complicity in academic dishonesty involves knowingly contributing to or cooperating with another’s act(s) of academic dishonesty.
